Well, good morning, commissioner,
and happy New Year to you and, uh, your office.
We welcome you back to the Environment Select Committee this
morning to, uh, give us, uh, some evidence
and, um, your thoughts on your report in relation
to the estimate of environmental expenditure.
So, uh, we will hand it over to you.
You have 30 minutes with us this morning, so, um,
members I'm sure will have plenty of questions.
So, uh, we'll hand it over you
to you for your opening remarks. Very
Good. I'll be as brief as
I can so you can ask some questions and,
and Happy New Year to you.
Seeming old to me already, but still.
Um, look, I'll, I'll, I'll take you, um, through this.
I've got a few words to say about ology for nature.
A few words to say about work with Donald Regional Councils.
Um, just a couple of caveats right up front.
Um, this series only goes back to 20 22, 23,
so it's still young,
and I would caution against making too many comparisons over
trends over time, yet, um, uh,
there have been improvements in the way we've collected the
data and there has also been, um, um,
some changes to methodology.
Second thing is that I should just note that up
until this year, 25, 26 mfe, um,
numbers were completely opaque.
Um, and so it was really quite difficult to interpret.
There's been a big improvement.
And this year Peter can
talk to you about that if you're interested.
But it's, this is a, this is a,
a new system which I've done without the assistance
of the treasury or anyone else, which is a pity like it,
but still, um, it's developing.
And, um, we've had to do a lot of work to set it up in a way
so that you have over time a, a respectable, uh,
database that you can work across years from if you wish to.
Um, with that said, the clear trend, um, in 25 26 overall
for environmental expenditure under the categorization we
produce is a, uh, is a clear decrease, uh,
at 2.565 billion.
That's the lowest since, uh, our first estimate.
Uh, so now this part of public expenditure accounts for 1.4%
of total budgeted expenditure compared to 2%.
The decrease, um, is largely a result of the tapering off
of funding associated
with the recovery from the North Island weather events
of a little while back.
Um, for reasons which we absolutely cleared
to this committee, this one is likely
to continue to bounce around.
So I think you need to put that to one side.
Looking at longer term trends, um,
there has been a very significant decrease with respect
to climate mitigation expenditure,
which peaked at 840 million in 2324.
It's fallen to 444 million in this current year.
Now, look, to be frank with you,
the gross numbers are not particularly interesting,
and I haven't produced them for the purpose
of making claims about whether the aggregate
amount went up or down.
That's not the point of the exercise they've been produced
to help this committee and this office to dig deeper
and understand how across government we are contributing
to achieving, uh, all environmental outcomes, um,
and whether we are making a difference,
and whether we could be spending the money better
or whether we've got the, the balance right.
Uh, and to ask that, uh, you have
to ask questions that dig deeper.
I'm saying you the committee, I'm doing the same.
My deep dig for this year is focused on spending on
environmental research
and how that may be affected by current reforms
of the public science system.
That's not easy. You go to mb you ask
where the money's going,
and you'll see in, in our report,
we've got other famous sanky diagram
and there's money from MB running to the various outcomes.
But look, it's actually extremely hard to to, to, to, to,
to track that the money's always behind.
Uh, it's not necessarily allocated
to which we could easily see.
What I want to do is to understand, okay,
where will we putting our environmental research investment
before these reforms?
Where will we be afterwards? Did some areas win?
Did some areas lose? What's the aggregate?
But the, you have to ask a lot of questions,
and I would encourage you to use this sort of information
to do the same.
I think you need to identify areas that you'd like
to dig into starting from these numbers.
We, we went to great trouble, uh,
to have them in your hands two weeks before scrutiny week.
And as far as I'm aware, they weren't used.
So I would urge you to use them in the, for the purpose
of which they're intended, focus on a particular area.
You can't focus on all of this.
You can't focus on two, six, 5 billion, 2.65 billion.
It's really, it, it's a tool which gives you the totality
and then enables you to say, we want to zero in on an area.
We want to ask some questions across all
of government in that area.
And it was plenty to focus on.
I mean, for instance, if you look at the environmental
institutions line, by the way, we, when I say look at that,
what we're looking at is this table here.
Okay? Yeah. Look at the environmental, uh,
institutions, uh, line.
Um, if you want to understand the decline
in 23, 24 and 24, 25, why did that happen?
Well, it's attributable to lots of things.
I mean, there were cuts at dock in terms of biodiversity,
MPI spending less on agricultural policy initiatives.
And it comes down to quite small things like the sustainable
farming fund got halved or whatever,
and then it pops up again in 24, 25.
Why? Well, the reason seems to be that MFE was boosting, uh,
its spending around the RMA reform.
So suddenly there's a big chunk of money, uh, going there.
Spending by other agencies stays largely
static across the period.
Now, obviously, that money being spent
around RMA reform isn't gonna go on forever.
That's a so short term thing.
I'm just trying to, it's, sorry.
It's, it is on page five you're talking about, and it's,
and the breakdown and the title is Improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of institutions designed
to manage Human interventions in the environ table on
that's Oh, yeah, yeah.
Table one. Yeah. Yeah. Just, I'm just giving you an example.
You see it, there's a big drop there and no explanation.
You can, we've got some information below
that, but not a great deal.
But as a committee, you have the authority to hire people
to come in and tell you what's going on.
So you can go below those numbers.
As I've said to you, I'm doing that on, on research.
Um, so could I, could I encourage you to, to use this?
I didn't just do it for the committee.
I've done it for my own purposes.
I don't see, it could be commissioner for the environment
and not know where all of this money's being spent
and on what, so we're trying
to get some transparency around this.
Mm-hmm. And it may lead you to conclusions
that you didn't think you'd come to.
You might think that actually we're probably spending enough
there, but we're not spending enough there.
Or we're supposed to be spending a lot.
But what are the results? These are the sorts
of questions which this was done to assist you with.
So I won't go on about that.
Um, the numbers and the numbers, um,
you'll have noted in this report,
we did a little focus area on Jobs for Nature.
'cause that was, uh, coming to an end.
Uh, we tried to attribute the money
to the three big environmental, uh, outcomes, um,
to the, to the, to the classification we are using.
And they basically get spent in three large areas,
biodiversity, freshwater, pest control,
and, um, what did we learn?
Uh, and you'll see we've got some comments there on page 13
relating to our work.
Um, and I think, uh, dig into this, um, really,
um, confirmed the whole purpose
for doing this sort of exercise.
The first is
that environmental challenges cut across the
responsibilities of many agencies.
The appropriations based system,
whereby you hold governments
to account on the appropriations,
doesn't work easily when you've got things which can go
across agencies.
So that poses a challenge for tracking expenditure
and, uh, impact.
And the auditor generals had some things to say about this,
and I think this approach could be useful, uh, in trying
to get better transparency.
The second thing we've consistently called
for is stronger public accountability
and reporting on environmental objectives.
Uh, governments need to be a whole lot clearer about
what they're trying to achieve.
Um, thirdly, we need to report on the impact
of any investment, um, not just outputs, but outcomes.
I mean, you could say, oh, well, jobs
for Nature was about jobs and yeah,
we've covered up the jobs and we've got X jobs.
Well, if that's why you did it, fine,
if you claimed you were doing it,
which was the claim at the time, no, no, no,
for helping the environment.
Okay, what is it you were trying to achieve?
Did you achieve it? I mean,
and it's not a, again, can I say, it's not a question of,
uh, gotcha type stuff.
Often when you start expenditure in these areas,
you don't know whether they're gonna be successful
and you learn from failures.
I, I think this is really, really important.
Um, so no one should be embarrassed about expenditure,
which may have missed the target.
You just don't want to go on spending it in the same
way in the next year.
So we wanna learn from what we're doing.
Another difficulty is that, you know,
environmental issues take time to resolve,
and you've got lots of communities working hard,
things like catchment groups and so on,
but their progress is hindered
by the fact you get this on again, off again, funding.
There's a little scheme here this year.
Then there's another one next year,
and then it's gone and there's a new one.
You know, this is a real problem for a lot
of community based people, who I think more
and more, I think people really even need to rely on.
Now. Look, there's presently, uh,
this is the big, I think, conclusion.
You have to draw about something like Jobs for Nature.
There's no guarantee that the undoubted progress
that was made under some headings will be sustained.
As I say in the report, wallabies wilding pines
and water quality did not appear as problems
because of COVID Ovid 19.
Mm-hmm. And the end of the Jobs for Nature program is likely
to see pressures that were temporarily suppressed, reemerge,
uh, and you really have to think about that as well,
because if you just throw money at something
for a short period and then take it away,
you've effectively wasted taxpayer's money.
If, if, if things are re invading, whether it's wallabies
or possums or whatever, uh, it's, it's, so maybe it's better
to have a long, maybe spend less,
but have a sustained longer term approach.
Uh, again, these are all questions,
I think a select committee, um, should be able
to follow up on with, in much greater detail than I can.
It was also clear to us
that there wasn't any rigorous prioritization exercise
to use to identify which bits
of the environment you would go after.
So if you haven't read that little section of it, do, uh,
with the sort of resources I've got in the time,
and we were rushing to get this two year scrutiny week,
that's about the best that I can do.
But it's the sort of thing which if you decide
as a committee this year, let's focus on a thing and,
and get the agencies in that you can do.
So, that's jobs for nature.
Um, quick word on regional councils.
This expenditure, of course, is expenditure
by central government, but regional councils are a
hugely important part.
I mean, they really are the frontline
of environmental management, uh, for much of New Zealand,
and they spend quite a lot of money too.
So we thought, well, it would be interesting, uh, for you
and for us to understand what the nature of that spend is.
And we did a pilot, um, which, uh, you know,
you've go with cap in hand.
They don't have to help us,
but they, they try when they can.
And so, Hawke's Bay, Waikato, Taranaki,
and Marlborough, which is a unit free, uh, agreed to help,
which is, and we're very grateful
to them for the help they gave us.
Um, and we wanted to know whether we could go
inside regional councils
and categorize their expenditure using the classification
that we've developed here.
Um, the exercise proved that it was technically feasible
to do that, uh,
although, um, it would probably require a few adjustments.
Um, and Peter can tell you more about
that if you are interested, because regional councils aren't
exactly accounting for things the way government does.
Um, we think to make it work, you'd have
to have a champion in each regional council who's prepared
to assist, um,
because this is not their day job trying
to help the parliamentary commissioner of the environment.
So you've really gotta get somebody.
And, and those councils did indeed find us
somebody who could, we could work with.
We're very grateful to them.
Um, but what we've run up against is this.
We've now got massive institutional reform being proposed
at the regional level.
Uh, so we're gonna pause everything.
It is just, I mean, A, they're distracted.
B we don't know what's going
to be there on at the regional level, um, a year from now.
So, um, we are going to pull back at this point,
but just to give you an idea of what's at stake,
total environmental spending from just two councils
representing 4%
of New Zealand's population was over $60 million.
It'd be good to know, wouldn't it, how that 60 million
fits into and backs up
or doesn't, what central government
is spending in those regions.
Mm-hmm. This is, we, we, we, we really need
to understand the total picture.
So we'll come back to that once the
reforms have been completed.
Finally, just a quick, uh, note to say that, um,
we're still improving this estimate over time.
And we came across, um, a big, a big hole.
Um, this sheer, um,
we undercounted biosecurity related expenditure by, uh,
$30 million.
And guess where the gap was? It was Lins.
Lins actually spends quite a lot
of money when you consider it.
It was a land manager. Yeah. $30 million,
which they hadn't classified for us.
Um, and so anyhow, we've got that into the tent now.
But just to make the point,
we we're still uncovering expenditure,
quite important lumps.
So 30 million is not nothing, which is contributing
to the environmental outcomes
that you're all trying to, to achieve.
Uh, but we actually wasn't even on our radar screen.
It wasn't on their radar screen.
So am I correct that they they notified us? That's correct.
Yeah. So anyhow, I'll leave, look, I'll leave it there,
but I, I'm very hopeful a committee will,
and you're very welcome to come and talk to us about this.
If you want to embark on something, we can probably advise
what might be easy, what might be harder.
But this is something and I, I use for my analysis,
but I think you could use it as well.
So, well, thank
You very much for that insight.
Look, we will hand over to questions.
We'll go to Priyanka first.
Thank you. Uh, commissioner, thank you
for your work on this.
It's, um, and your team,
it's been really insightful actually,
and I think it kind of goes
to a different way of looking at spend.
Yes, it does. Is what you're saying, um, here.
And so that's made me think if we were looking at it
in a sense, sort of, um, back to front.
So rather than looking at what percentage
of G ps being spent on, um, environmental outcomes
and just the GDP,
It was government Expenditure, uh, sorry,
government expenditures being spent on, um, uh,
environmental outcomes.
If we look at it from the other end
of the outcomes themselves and what we want to achieve,
and then work backwards, that's right.
From there, I would think that for governments
to do it back, I mean, it makes sense to me.
It makes sense in the way that you've laid it out.
The success of governments have tried
to do things differently.
Some of us have been part of the domestic
and sexual violence, um, projects
that look at bringing different agencies together
towards specific outcomes.
It's, it's, it's not easy, I guess is what I'm getting at.
Sure. What do governments need to be aware of, uh,
in terms of what you've experienced
and learned through this process to be able
to front end that way of thinking? Well,
I mean, you have to do both.
I mean, you on behalf of taxpayers are appropriating money,
and you have to be able to account for it.
And that's what the auditor, general auditor general checks.
Yeah. And you have oversight of, so you, you have, you have
to do that end of the telescope.
Yeah. But the art comes in. Absolutely.
That's where we need to do much more work.
And if you want that to be an easier to do exercise,
it really comes down to the finance
and expenditure committee, I suppose.
Um, although I've just gone off and done this
and I've, I've, I've reported this to them, by the way,
and I've talked to them about this.
Mm-hmm. But if you, if you want to do this, you really need,
it's all boring, tedious stuff.
You need to develop standardized
methodologies for doing things.
And as I say in the report, a standardized mechanism
for tagging departmental expenditure against defined
environmental activities would allow
for clearer more comparable reporting
between government departments.
And I don't think this is so difficult.
Uh, it's like barcoding things.
Um, now the, the departments are set up with charts
of accounts, which are all different
and operate in different ways for good reason.
I'm not suggesting you try and get in there.
We've got to work with government.
What, well, we are working
with government departments each year
going back to the same people.
Hopefully they haven't, hasn't been a wrong door.
They know what we're talking about. Yes.
We know what you're coming for. Yes.
We can do that exercise for you.
Uh, now it could be made easier.
I have tried, I've asked two
ministers finance if they would help.
So far, I haven't been lucky.
Um, and you might think about other
reasons of government expenditure.
I think this one lends itself to it
because the outcomes are so diffuse.
They're so all encompassing of the nation.
You know, our biodiversity, our biosecurity,
our water quality, and there's so many agencies involved.
Unless you can put the big picture together,
you really don't get, you can't see the wood for the trees.
Yeah. So, but it, it comes down to it's just hard work.
I mean, Peter here is a, a, a person
who comes from a statistical background, understands public,
uh, public accounts, and understands statistics.
He has spent the last four years putting this together
That a, a really key part is
to get those high level outcomes agreed
or defined in some way that isn't going
to change when governments change.
Mm-hmm. So, hence improving biodiversity is quite general.
Reducing waste is quite general,
but they're unlikely to, those objectives
or outcomes are unlikely to change
depending on who the government is.
Each government will do it differently,
which is why you'll see the spending
Moving around. Yeah. Around
It a bit. Uh,
we've been able to do it
because we're in a, the parliamentary commissioner,
so we've been able to set those.
If you're trying to do it in other areas,
you'd need some mechanism to agree
what those broad outcomes are.
Yeah. I don't think you need to reinvent this wheel here.
Yeah. I think we've come up
with a completely non-contentious, it's not partisan.
It's completely non-contentious description
of the environmental spend under headings,
which I think are uncontentious
and most New Zealanders understand.
The other, the other side of
what you're asking though is outcome evaluation
and broadly speaking there, uh, you know,
and what the commissioners consistently push
for over time is, you know,
if you look at the social investment, uh, area,
what allows measurements of outcomes there is
the integrated data infrastructure.
Yeah. You know, which has been
invested in since Bill English's Times.
It is a fantastic resource.
That's what we need in the environmental space
that brings together all the environmental information so
that you can actually start to measure, you know, the,
the outcomes of it, of activities like jobs for nature.
Sorry, what was the term you just
Said? Yeah, just one last,
The integrated data infrastructure, the ID
The RDI. Yes.
Absolute skeleton of the whole social fiscal interface.
J just, just a last follow up on that then.
I mean, I think that's key in terms of this being sort
of non-contentious as you see it in getting
that agreement across, uh, the political spectrum,
because how large an exercise would this be?
I mean, it's definitely not a one term thing,
but how, given that you've done some work well on it, we've
Done it. Look, it's,
it, it takes about what, um,
takes about 0.4 of an FTE, uh, a year for us.
But we haven't got the level of sophistication
and granularity you would have if
you had the source centralized.
But I mean, you, you can either decide
to make it very expensive and very, very complicated,
or you could decide to do something, which is good enough.
I mean, coming down to micro, you know,
$10,000 level accuracy on all this is meaningless.
The, the level of granularity ma matches the scale
of the so and
Meant changing the system as you were talking
about from the back end.
But yeah. We'll,
I, that's doable. I
mean, we've, we've, we've assessed the feasibility
and it, and it's doable.
What it really requires is, the crucial thing is
what Matt said, is actually having a coding system
that lasts across administrations, which requires,
you know, some agreed outcomes.
But we've, and look, you,
you've got the agreed outcomes here, so,
so actually making this an automatic part
of the budget process wouldn't be difficult in my view.
And Lan, you've got a supplementary on this. Yeah.
A quick clarification question.
When you say that there have been improvements since the
2223, are you just saying that's simply
because you have been asked, asking those questions
and you're going back year after year?
Yes. Yes. That's where the improvements
have come from rather than
Anything else. Yes. So, um,
what we've done is we've
extended coverage of agencies.
So we've included agencies like MFAs, K, um,
and also had a more granular desegregation
of those Crown agents, eca, EPA.
Um, so it's about getting, uh, more accurate,
more granular data about
their functions in the environmental space.
Okay. Thank you. And then can I ask you Yeah,
I'll just move to, 'cause we've got a couple
of other questions as well, and then I'll come back to you
La So Ryan, thanks, chair.
Um, Simon, my question sort of follow on from that is,
I guess can you and appreciate what you're saying about,
you know, the, trying to sort
of pull together the ad hoc expenditure,
but the data, you know, then the data's
not apples and apples.
It's apples and oranges, um,
given the wider work stream across government,
given the RMA reform and your role on that,
and also the public performance
and accountability, which, uh, is being run through FEC,
but it's designed to better, um, be transparent in terms of
outcomes, outputs, clarity.
Do you think there's an opportunity for you to come up
with a unit or a framework
that might help government be more cohesive
and coalesce all these things
that they're talking in one language?
Well, I mean, you'd be aware we've briefed, uh, um,
finance expenditure on this.
Um, we think for our area it adds a,
a very significant improvement.
I mean, there's only so much I can do from outside, Ryan.
I mean, we've, we've put this in front of ministers,
we've put this in front of your
colleagues in finance expenditure.
You are honest, aren't you? Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
So you, you've heard me in in that context.
Um, it's really, I'm not sure got any ideas as to
how we can push this further?
Well, I think what we said in the briefing, FVC is that
the, the answer in each in different areas
won't be exactly the same.
There will be differences, but the basic framework, uh,
we think is, is transferrable across, across different,
you know, different areas of government. Yeah.
There, there's areas of government where you wouldn't want
to do this and you don't need to.
I mean, I, I really, would you
spend time on defense on this?
I mean, you, it's all within a vote.
You can do it within the votes.
It's, it's these cross cutting
things and there's a few of them. Yeah.
And thanks, thanks Jeff,
for just letting me test this out.
I guess with the potential consolidation
of regional councils mm-hmm.
And, and your, and your, you know, allusion to the fact
that there's already spending within regional councils,
it's probably not captured in our environmental expenditure.
Do you think there's an opportunity to better frame up
through the RMA or through a legislative tool
or something that better tries to capture that?
Um, so that we have a, a snowball and hell's chance of
Well, I, I, I all depends on the
institutional framework they create.
I mean, if we ended up with having, you know, 30
or 40 unitary councils, then I'd say
just becomes impossible.
Uh, if you got rid of regions altogether
and had only TLAs, I think you're even worse position.
Um, but I mean, until you on the environmental area,
because it's just fragmenting something, which is
not easily fragmental.
But if we stay with something like the sort
of current regional level of, of aggregation, uh,
I think you, if, if once we're
through the form, you don't wanna get in people's way.
But once that's done, I think it would be possible to talk
to whoever's delivering those services at that level to say,
right, look, we'd like to be able
to track this in a consistent way.
Uh, I don't, I think it'd be entirely possible,
but until we can see the institutional arrangements, I mean,
we haven't got anyone to talk to
apart anything else. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, now we'll move to lan.
Thank you. Um, just
A question about, I guess the total,
and I get that you're saying
that this isn't about the actual expenditure,
but you did identify this massive gap or drop how,
however you wanna call it, um,
between twenty four, twenty five
and 25, 26 of a billion dollars.
Do you think there would be worth in if there was, say
for example, a cross party agreement about the objectives
that we are trying to achieve, that there was some form of
aim of benchmarking so that there isn't
so much swing?
Because, you know, you even mentioned yourself how so much
of the swing is actually little bits
like projects across the country doing different things
and they are the ones that are actually experiencing the,
I guess the, um, well, the cuts,
Well, hang on. The, the
biggest change, the biggest change, uh,
is actually not little things.
It's under that line.
New Zealand is effectively adapting
to the impact of climate change.
That that's, uh, and that, that's response to events. Yeah.
That's the biggest single change.
So let's be clear about that.
That this drop reflects a large
chunk of that drop reflects that.
No, but then there are a lot of other things.
Look, I mean, sorry, you are asking me if we could get,
um, what did you say?
So basically like that as part
of the cross party agreement,
there could be like a benchmark of like 2%
of expenditure or 2%.
No, I don't, I look, you, you, at the end of the day,
we elect governments and they've got priorities.
I, I, I, you know, if,
if you could do it, that would all be nice.
But I, I think it's unlikely what we can do though,
and we've done it, and none of you have objected,
I haven't had a single person come to me
and say, oh no, this is highly contentious.
Uh, we've, we've actually given you a classification so that
regardless of who the government is, you can identify
where expenditure fits under those headings.
Mm-hmm. And I think that's as much as you can ask an officer
of Parliament to do, it's for you as elected people
to decide on your priorities and what you do where. Mm-hmm.
Okay. We just move on, on the question nine
to David McLeod,
And thank you. And, uh,
thank you once again
for your persistence in developing this on a annual basis.
And, uh, although, uh, many of us have been here
for a short time, it seems to be a,
a repeated conversation that we have.
Mm-hmm. Um, which is said, you know, it,
and I've never seen, uh, anybody yet, uh, at our level, uh,
who disagrees with this actually being of some value.
So there's no question about that.
But I think the conversation today is,
there's two fronts to it.
One is the advocacy of how we can, uh, make sure
that this persists gets better
and expands into other areas of interest across government.
But more importantly, back to one
of your original comments is, is that we can have a bit
of a scatter gun approach here.
Mm. And, uh, be weaker now holding, uh, executive
to account, et cetera by doing that.
Or we can prioritize
and your, your thoughts are priority,
which I agree upon considerably.
Now, over your time, you've, uh, produced a number
of reports and you must have run a process of why,
which report do we, what, what, what's our interest here?
What is our priority? So what, um, what thoughts
or what comments can you provide us to assist us
and how we actually prioritize across the many? Yeah, it's
A really good, really good question.
And look, uh, uh, some of you may have heard me say this
before, but, uh, everything, you know, we've got tiny,
tiny resources fraction of any
of the ministries we, we are dealing with.
So we have to have to prioritize.
I can't see any point in going
after things which basically seem to be going along.
Okay. No one's complaining about them,
and they seem to enjoy good support,
and they're delivering stuff.
So the big, there's, there's big hunks of public expenditure
where no one's gonna say, oh, well,
that could be done away with tomorrow.
I mean, you know, so there were, then,
there were then problems
where things clearly aren't going well
and they really are stuck.
I mean, and, and you see it
with parliament over parliament's
that the problem never seems to go away.
You take water quality in the environmental area,
that is one that is just an ongoing issue, right?
So that's the sort of area where I think, uh,
it's worth taking a, a deep dive.
And at the other end of the spectrum,
and I've done a few of these,
what's an area which is right off the radar screen
that really no one's talking about, but maybe they should be
because there's a sleeper, you know?
And so we've gone and, and,
and done a number of reviews on things,
which really were not on the front pages
and were not front of mind,
but we were aware that in many cases,
the good New Zealanders struggling away with a problem,
which really needs to, to put seats of light on.
Now that you've got your own networks, you've, you know,
what's happening out New Zealand as well as anyone.
And there must be things times when people say to you, look,
do you even know about this?
It seems to have no profile. Nobody cares.
Okay, well if it's, if, if enough of you agree on that
and it's in the environmental lyrics, say, well, hang on,
let's just dig into here and see,
because you'll find in many cases, you'll have a bit of doc,
a bit of lens, a bit of MPI, a bit of MFE.
You'll have all sorts of things
with fingers in different dikes,
but it may not actually add up.
So even if you didn't spend more, you might be able
to spend the same amount more effectively, the outcome.
And in some cases, you might then say, look, hang on,
this is a bigger priority than some
of the things we are spending more on.
I, I, I, you know, I, I, so I select my, my topics.
I'm, um, and some of them are reviews.
I'm doing a review of marine biosecurity.
Um, I don't know how much of a priority you think that is,
but um, I thought actually it doesn't get a lot of press.
Let's just have a look and see how well we do it,
whether we're doing it as well as we can.
I will much more contentious,
I'll be giving you something in towards the middle
of the year on the Environment Emissions trading scheme, uh,
which will pull together all the work I've done there.
Now we have an emissions trading scheme, um,
and we keep saying it's very, very important,
but is it actually doing the job it's designed to do?
Uh, so, you know, I'm,
I'm sure you can find plenty in here
that you could drill down into.
I'm happy to help too. That's the other thing.
If you wanna come to us and say, look, we,
we've been thinking about a number of topics, you know,
what would your view be?
We do have some, you know, insight in this,
so we could probably help.
Thank you. Look, we have got a few more questions
and we are nearly at time.
So we will move to Rachel
Brooking. Uh, more
a comment and then a question, short comment.
And that is, I can tell you that I like your outcomes.
I think they are uncon, they're not contentious, as you say,
except, uh, the climate change one, uh,
would be very useful if that was split into the mitigation.
And I'm not, I think I know the reason why it's not.
That's because this is how a lot
of government departments code it.
Uh, but particularly given the adaptation piece is
so reactive in it as you identified in your opening.
Yeah. It's the
Piece that moves around A whole lot.
So that's one point. And my second one is just if you can
clarify that this, uh, mechanism
for tagging departmental expenditure, I think I heard, uh,
Jeff say that that would be easy,
but you say that you need the help
of the Minister of Finance.
So, so given that the outcomes are, seem to be agreed on,
is it just, um, uh, direction from the Minister
of Finance that is needed?
Or is it something more complicated? Well,
You, you, excuse me.
It's a little bit more complicated.
This is to say, go and do it and pick up what the PC's done.
Someone would have to look at the way we've done this
and come up with a coding, uh, methodology,
which was robust.
And then you've got to explain, as we've had to do
with each government department, look,
this is what we're trying to achieve.
And look, if you, if you,
if you've been reading these over the years, you'll know,
I mean, the stuff where we can't, the the stuff
that we can't easily attribute, it's all mixed up.
Yeah. And so you, you, you, you, you have
to be honest about what you can't do.
And so is it gonna be, is it gonna be as an item
as soon you're gonna be principally
that contributing to that outcome.
So what's principally mean?
What's, what's the fraction and so on, so forth.
So you need to work that through. It's got to be workable.
You can't have, I know public servants going down,
you know, to sort of micro level.
It's silly implementation.
It's, I think, I think there is,
there is real implementation work to be done.
It's not easy. But,
but I think we've proved with the goodwill, actually of,
of a lot of very helpful public servants, you can do this.
So I don't think it would be a, oh my god moment
for the public service if we decided to make this.
But you're saying a 0.4, um,
a full-time equivalent has done this work from you,
so it should be something that Treasury has the capacity
to put some,
I i, look, I'm sure treasury has capacity.
I think the real issue is for, for government departments,
I think that's where the real work has done.
'cause you can say to them, okay,
look, here's justification.
This is how you do it, blah. You go away and do it. Wow.
You know, you, as we've discovered, you then have to go
and talk to a lot of people.
Mm-hmm. Uh, you've gotta understand a different,
it's gonna have a different understanding of
how you are spending public money.
But, so it's two lenses. Do you want add anything?
I don't think it's just different agencies
have different charts of accounts.
So it's really, um, tailoring the process
to a specific agency, um, to get that detail that you want.
But it doesn't have to be gold
standard in terms of accounting. Yeah,
That's right. Just a quick
step on that, 'cause it's,
because obviously what is, um, classified
as environmental spending may change
and, uh, be a little bit more diverse across agencies.
Do you find that or not?
'cause you know, there's all sorts of things
that you could potentially attribute
to environmental spending.
Yeah, so we, we use a standard definition,
international definition for this.
And, um, there is a lot of variability across agencies.
Um, but the definition is so poor
that it encompasses every sort
of material environmental expenditure, um,
that agencies incur.
So there's no, we don't find
so many issues around that. Yeah.
Okay. Interesting. Um,
quick question from Grant McKellen. Um,
I was just gonna say to Rachel's point on, um,
the climate change fund, we are looking
to actually separate that out.
That's why we've done it on page eight here as well.
You have a look at page eight. We just need to work out how
to make that into the annual series
so it doesn't muck up past once. Yeah.
A quick question around, um,
the working in the regional councils, um, did you see, um,
sort of obvious overlap
and a lack of coordination between
regional councils are doing and
what government government departments are up to?
No. Well, I'll speak for myself here, and,
and this is not based on, on this exercise,
but no, I mean, there's, there is as much overlap
and duplication between government
departments, frankly Yeah.
At the level of regions than there is the regions.
I mean, regional councils often find they've got MPI
borrowing away here and there were MFE over there.
You know, I think the,
before the Crown, you know,
targets regional councils too much,
I think they do a pretty good job with not much resource.
The Crown needs to sort out its view of how it's going
to help them and intervene.
So, so there's more opportunity to actually work together.
Yes. More effectively. No question. That's your underlying
Message. No question
about that. Yeah.
Okay. We'll just take one last question from Julianne.
Thank you so much. Love your work.
Um, this is maybe a little overly ambitious,
but, um, like, would it be useful if we had these categories
and we have the outcomes, we want
to also look at government spending that is actively
contributing to worse outcomes.
Because here we've got like NZTA spending 40 million on
climate action, and arguably they're spending several
billion on things that are gonna increase submissions.
Um, I, I am aware, um, well, that's what accounting is.
Yeah. I mean, it's just like, if we're only looking at
what government's doing to try
and get these better outcomes, do we also need
to look at government spending
that might be actively undermining?
Yeah, but you do that, you do
that in other places, in other ways.
I mean, you, you looking at transport expenditure. Yeah.
Um, so, you know, you, you, you can dig into that.
Um, but I mean, we're not gonna start
reporting on negative outcomes.
I mean, governments say
that this is a fundamental premise in, in democracies that,
you know, people, we, we do things collectively.
We use government because they want
to achieve certain outcomes.
No one is wanting to achieve an outcome of worse climate
or worse biodiversity or worse basket.
That's right. So, so I think we need
to part that, that idea.
The question is, well, okay, is the money you are spending
to advance these covered outcomes is that, uh,
actually achieving its end?
And it's always open to people to say,
and at the same time you are spending,
I did this at the OCD all the time, you know,
looking at environmental subsidies,
sub subsidies, which were damaging the environment.
So you're spending all of this money here.
What about that spend there?
This, this process enables you to do that.
Thank you. Look, we have met time.
We appreciate, uh, all your insights on this topic, uh,
which obviously, uh, reoccurs
and we appreciate all your work on it. Um, may
I just ask you one question?
Yes. We really put a lot of work into getting this prior
to scrutiny week for you, and I want to continue to do that.
Should we continue to do that? Is this useful for you?
Oh, I think it's very useful
and we certainly appreciate the work
and you getting it to us
before scrutiny week so that we can, um, you know,
ask more direct questions around that spending. So check
That. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you
Very much for your time today.
Yes.